Howard Phillips Lovecraft was born in 1890 in the family home in
Angell Street, Providence, Rhode Island. Except for short holidays
and a disastrous couple of years in New York, Lovecraft stayed close
to home and buried himself in antiquarian studies of New England.
He lived in the oldest settlements of the first Puritan arrivals in
America, and Lovecraft fashioned himself as an old Colonial, a man
out of time, writing letters in stilted eighteenth-century English, imitating the poetics of those Enlightenment wits Addison and Steele,
signing off his letters with 'God Save the King!' in defiance of this
newfangled American Republic. Lovecraft was born into America at
the moment that it became a world power, yet he lived and wrote with
his back turned steadfastly against the American century.
Whilst Lovecraft adored Colonial era houses, pottering about New
England on pilgrimages to notable survivals, his obsession with the
past was never retreat. The inheritance of New England was ambiguous. The Puritans wanted to throw off priestcraft and establish the
kingdom of God. To clear the ground for that celestial city, they
slaughtered Native Americans and built the nation on the backs of
African slaves. The sublime wilderness pressed in on their feeble
footholds. And the settlers only brought their fallen ways with them.
In Salem, a place Lovecraft visited and used as the basis for his fictional town Arkham, the notorious witch-hunts turned the community against itself in a fever of denunciation in 1692. Nineteen people
were hanged as witches on Gallows Hill before the grip of paranoia
eased. The great American Gothic writer Nathaniel Hawthorne was
haunted by the fact that an ancestor had served as one of the hanging
judges; the threat of such a guilty inheritance was the subject of his
Gothic romance, The House o/Seven Gables. Ancestral horrors lurked
in the family trees of New England. This was the direct theme of
Lovecraft's 'The Shadow over Innsmouth', because for him these
inheritances were intensely personal.
Introduction IX
Lovecraft was the last descendant of two notable New England
families. In 1893, his father collapsed with paresis, and spent the
remaining years of his life in an asylum. Paresis was the degenerative
muscular weakness that was associated with the late stages of syphilis,
the then incurable sexually transmitted disease in which spirochaetes
devour the nervous system over long years of decline. The disease
was regarded as a moral failing and hushed up. It was also transmissible to children, and H. P. Lovecraft must have lived under the
shadow of the disease. In 1896, his grandmother died, prompting the
young Lovecraft to suffer horrifying nightmares mixed up with his
already precocious reading of Milton's Paradise Lost, in an edition
illustrated with images of hell by Gustav Don!.
Childhood trauma was compounded by the death of his grandfather in 1904. Whipple Phillips was the last tie to hereditary family
wealth, and reduced circumstances forced the family to leave the
ancestral home and move into a smaller property. It left Lovecraft
feeling exiled for the rest of his life and this event drove his antiquarian and genealogical fascinations. Lovecraft was a sickly child, nervous illnesses disrupting his schooling to an extent that he could not
graduate to attend Brown University in Providence. A breakdown at
18 left him a recluse in his mother's home for several years. In letters
Lovecraft declared himself a neurotic: 'Nervous exhaustion always
intervenes between me and success,' he said: 'I am only about halfalive ... My nervous system is a shattered wreck.'2 In an attempt to
escape, Lovecraft tried to join the army in 1917, even while suspecting that basic training would kill him before he got to the trenches in
France. His mother intervened with military authorities and
Lovecraft was declared permanently unfit for service. Family catastrophe was crowned by his mother's mental collapse in 1919 from
nervous debility. She died in a sanatorium two years later.
After his mother's death, Lovecraft's health improved, yet he must
have identified himself as a Decadent. One of Lovecraft's favourite
Poe stories was 'The Fall of the House of Usher', featuring Roderick
Usher, the last, peculiarly sensitive member of his ancient family.
Although Lovecraft disliked the work of French DecadentJoris-Karl
Huysmans, Lovecraft's life recalls the anti-hero of his strange nove


Lovecraftian Philosophy
At its best, Lovecraft's moments of oscillation between the sublime
and grotesque approach metaphysical intensity. 'The Call ofCthulhu'
opens with the statement: 'The most merciful thing in the world,
I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents.
We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of
infinity' (p. 24). The narrator of ' At the Mountains of Madness' experiences a similar collapse of worldview as his 'accustomed conception
of external nature and nature's laws' is destroyed (p. 207). For many
readers, one of the key pleasures of Lovecraft's work is the way
the fiction becomes a vehicle for the dramatization of a rigorous
philosophy.
Lovecraft was well versed in scientific materialism. He read the
biologist Ernst Haeckel's The Riddle of the Universe with admiration.
12 Kant, Critique o/Judgment, cited in Carol Korsmeyer, Sawring Disgust: The Foul
and the Fair in Aesthetics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011),46.
" Lovecraft, 'Suggestions ror a Reading Guide', in The Dark Brotherhood and Other
Pieces ky H. P. Lovecraji and Divers Hands (Sauk City, Wis.: Arkham House, 1966), 42
and Letter (7 Sept. 1934), SL v. 31.
XXlI Introduction
The book argued that Darwinism had made it clear that there was
only one order of reality and thus stripped humanity of any
metaphysical illusions of soul or transcendental order. Lovecraft
read Schopenhauer's pessimistic account of blind striving Will and
Nietzsche's splenetic relativization of Christian morals. The strand
of pessimism was strong in Lovecraft's thinking, and was voiced in
the late 1920S by Oswald Spengler's The Decline of the West, an influential account of the cyclical decline of Western culture, in accord
with iron laws of determinism. Drafted in the Great War and published in Germany in the crisis conditions of the 19205, Spengler's
philosophy of history inverted many values: civilization marked the
death throes of culture, not its apotheosis; imperialism was the last
decadence, 'a doom, something daemonic'; the great metropolitan
city was the sign of imminent collapse of a race. All of this spoke
directly to Lovecraft and is everywhere apparent in his fiction.
His philosophical pessimism was tinged by cynicism, arguing for
maintaining certain illusions to pacify what Lovecraft called 'the
herd'. Lovecraft praised Joseph Wood Krutch's book, The Modern
Temper, for its fearless expression of the shattering effect of modern
science. Krutch suggested that mythology, religion, and metaphysics
had 'all collapsed under the face of successive attacks' since the nineteenth century, leaving the West haunted 'by ghosts from a dead
world and not yet at home in its own'. To avoid chaos, Krutch suggested a need to maintain traditions however hollowed out of meaning. This was a stance Lovecraft often adopted: 'Tradition means
nothing cosmically, but it means everything locally and pragmatically
because we have nothing else to shield us from the devastating sense
of "lostness" in endless space and time. '14
The clearest position Lovecraft came to articulate, though, was
cosmic indifferentism. In an important letter to the editor of Weird
Tales, resubmitting 'The Call of Cthulhu' for consideration,
Lovecraft said:
Now all my tales are based on the fundamental premise that common
human laws and interests and emotions have no validity or significance
in the vast cosmos-at-Iarge. To me there is nothing but puerility in a tale
in which the human form-and the local human passions and conditions
and standards-are depicted as native to other worlds or other universes.
I< Quotations from Joseph Wood Krutch, The Modern Temper: A Study and A
Conjess;on (London: Cape, 1930), 12 and 26. Lovecraft, Letter (10 June 1929), SL ii. 357.
Introduction XXlll
To achieve the essence of real externality, whether of time or space or
dimension, one must forget that such things as organic life, good and evil,
love and hate, and all such local attributes of a negligible and temporary
race called mankind have any existence at all.
This was a strictly in-human stance, a different emphasis from the
cynical or pessimistic strands of Lovecraft's thinking. 'Contrary to
what you may assume,' he said in a later letter, 'I am not a pessimist but
an indifferentist-that is, 1 don't make the mistake of thinking that the
resultant of natural forces surrounding and governing organic life
will have any connexion with the wishes or tastes of any part of that
organic life-process. Pessimists are just as illogical as optimists ...
Both schools retain in a vestigial way the primitive concept ... of a
cosmos which gives a damn one way or the other. 'IS This philosophy
appears fitfully in Lovecraft's actual fiction, but supplies some of his
most chilling moments of climax. It is a stance that is allergic to every
moral or humanistic defence of the purpose of literature explored by
his contemporaries.
Modern philosophers have expanded on the radical possibilities of
Lovecraft's stance. His fiction has been read as an attempt to think
outside the subject and give priority to the weirdness of the object
world, making Lovecraft a key figure for thinkers like Graham
Harman and Eugene Thacker. 'The weird is the discovery of an
un human limit to thought, that is nevertheless foundational for
thought,' Thacker suggests, defining Lovecraftian horror as an
attempt to think about 'the world-with out-us' .16 Whilst exploring 'real
externality' in these abstract, philosophical ways, Lovecraft's 'weird
realism' is also a particular reflection on his times.
Pulp Fiction for a Morbid Age
By Armistice Day in 1918, it was estimated that ten million military
personnel has been killed in the Great War. Civilian deaths were
nearly as high, and the catastrophe was compounded by the outbreak
of 'Spanish flu' which killed many millions more between 1918
and 1920. There was a widespread view among intellectuals that the
IS Lovecraft, Letters, SL ii. 150 and iii. 39.
,. Citations from Eugene Thacker, After Li/e (Chicago: University or Chicago Press,
2010),23, and In the Dust o/This Planet (Horror o/Philosopkv, vol. i) (Winchester: Zero
Books, 2011), 9.
XXIV Introduction
Great War marked the end of European culture: the 'suicide of civilization' was a common phrase. The Treaty ofVersaiIles, signed in June
19 I 9, which forced punitive reparations on Germany, sowed the seeds
for collapse and the rise of extreme politics across Europe. Amidst
civil war in Russia following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, a
meeting of Communist parties announced the principles of the Third
International as the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie, by
armed force if necessary. In America, paranoia about immigrants
bringing Bolshevism into the country meant that 'nonconformist
aliens' were targeted by legislation and persecution in the Red Scare
of 1919. One English journalist called America 'hag-ridden by the
spectre of Bolshevism. It was like a sleeper in a nightmare, enveloped
by a thousand phantoms of destruction.' As capitalism tottered, the
authoritarian Fascist solution to crisis found power first in Italy and
then in Germany. From his prison cell in Italy, the Marxist Antonio
Gramsci composed the famous epigram: 'The crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in
this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear.'
We can count Lovecraft's fiction amongst these symptoms. I




THE CALL OF CTHULHU
(Found Among the Papers o/the Late Francis Wayland Thurston, o/Boston)
Of such great powers or beings there may be conceivably
a survival ... a survival of a hugely remote period when ...
consciousness was manifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms
long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing humanity ...
forms of which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying
memory and called them gods, monsters, mythical beings of all
sorts and kinds ...
AI.GERNON BLACKWOOD*
I. The Horror in Clay
T HE most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the
human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island
of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant
that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own
direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing
together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas
of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go
mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace
and safety of a new dark age.
Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic
cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. *
They have hinted at strange survival in terms which would freeze the
blood if not masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that
there came the single glimpse of forbidden aeons which chills me
when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse,
like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing
together of separated things-in this case an old newspaper item
and the notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if! live, I shall never knowingly supply
a link in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended
to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have
destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him.
The Call ofCthulhu 25
My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926--27 with
the death of my great-uncle, George Gammell Angell,* Professor
Emeritus of Semitic Languages in Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on
ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads
of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two
may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the
obscurity of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken
whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who
had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's
home in Williams Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible
disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure
lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by
so elderly a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no
reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to
wonder-and more than wonder.
As my great-uncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness;
and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my
quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be
later published by the American Archaeological Society, but there
was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt
much averse from showing to other eyes. It had been locked, and
I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal
ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then, indeed,
I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could
be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his
latter years, become credulous of the most superficial impostures?
I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this
apparent disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.
The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick
and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its
designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for, although the vagaries of cubism and futurism* are many
and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which
26 The Call ofCthulhu
lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of
these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite
much familiarity with the papers and collections of my uncle, failed
in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.
Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear
idea of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded
simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary
wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most
shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a
Cyclopean architectural background.
The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack
of press cuttings, in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made
no pretension to literary style. What seemed to be the main document was headed 'CTHULHU CULT' in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of.
This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was
headed '1925-Dream and Dream Work ofH. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas
St., Providence, R.I.,' and the second, 'Narrative of Inspector John
R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S.
Mtg.-Notes on Same, & Prof. Webb's Acct.' The other manuscript
papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer
dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosoJ?hical books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Elliott's Atlantis and
the Lost Lemuria), and the rest comments on long-surviving secret
societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer's Golden Bough
and Miss Murray's Witch-Cult in Western Europe.* The cuttings
largely alluded to outre mental illness and outbreaks of group folly or
mania in the spring of 1925.
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale.
It appears that on March I 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic
and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh.
The Call ofCthulhu 27
His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox,* and my uncle
had recognised him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly
known to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the
Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the Fleur-de-Lys
Building* near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of
known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited
attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the
habit of relating. He called himself 'psychically hypersensitive', but
the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely
'queer'. Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group
of aesthetes from other towns. Even the Providence Art Club,* anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.
On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor's manuscript, the
sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host's archaeological
knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He
spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for
the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything
but archaeology. Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my
uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a
fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of him, said,
'It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities,
and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative
Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon.'*
It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played
upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle.
There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most
considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's
imagination had been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an
unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and
sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with
latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and
from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not
a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into
sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble ofletters, 'Cthulhujhtagn'.*
This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited
28 The Call ofCthulhu
and disturbed Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with
scientific minuteness; and studied with almost frantic intensity the
bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and
clad only in his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly
over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his
slowness in recognising both hieroglyphics and pictorial design.
Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or
societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises
of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of
membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body.
When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was
indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his
visitor with demands for future reports of dreams. This bore regular
fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of
the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean
visits of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are
those rendered by the letters 'Cthulhu' and 'R'(yeh'.
On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to
appear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been
stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the horne of his
family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, arousing
several other artists in the building, and had manifested since then
only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. My uncle at once
telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close wat~h
of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr Tobey,
whom he learned to be in charge. The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now
and then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of
what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing
'miles high' which walked or lumbered about. He at no time fully
described this object but occasional frantic words, as repeated by
Dr Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the
nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture.
Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to
the young man's subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly
The Call ofCthulhu 29
enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was
otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.
On April 2nd at about 3 p.m. every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at
home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or
reality since the night of March 22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell
he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had
vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his nightthoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought-so
much, in fact, that only the ingrained scepticism then forming my
philosophy can account for my continued distrust of the artist. The
notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had
his strange visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a
prodigiously far-flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the friends
whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly
reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some
time past. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; but
he must, at the very least, have received more responses than any
ordinary man could have handled without a secretary. This original
correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough
and really significant digest. Average people in society and businessNew England's traditional 'salt of the earth' -gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless
nocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March
23rd and April 2nd-the period of young Wilcox's delirium.
Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague
description suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in
one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal.
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came,
and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to
compare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having
edited the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latently
resolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow
30 The Call ofCthulhu
cognisant of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had been
imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from aesthetes
told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the
dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the
sculptor's delirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything,
reported scenes and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had
described; and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the
gigantic nameless thing visible towards the last. One case, which the
note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely
known architect with leanings towards theosophy and occultism,
went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox's seizure, and
expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved
from some escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred to these
cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have attempted
some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the
notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor's
questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no
explanation shall ever reach them.
The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic,
mania, and eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell
must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts was
tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Here
was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped
from a window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letter
to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deduces a
dire future from visions he has seen. A dispatch from California
describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse'for
some 'glorious fulfilment' which never arrives, whilst items from
India speak guardedly of serious native unrest towards the end of
March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report
ominous mutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain
tribes bothersome about this time, and New York policemen
are mobbed by hysterical Levantines* on the night of March 22-23.
The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and a
fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous Dream
Landscape in the Paris spring salon of 1926.* And so numerous are
the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle can have
The Call ofCthulhu 31
stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and
drawing mystified conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told;
and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with
which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox
had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.
II. The Tale of Inspector Legrasse
The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and basrelief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half
of his long manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had
seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over
the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which
can be rendered only as 'Cthulhu'; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox
with queries and demands for data.
This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before,
when the American Archaeological Society held its annual meeting in
St Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations, and was one
of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and
problems for expert solution.
The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged
man who had travelled all the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source. His name was
John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of
police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was
at a loss to determine.
It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archaeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was
prompted by purely professional considerations. The statuette, idol,
fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in
lhe wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites
connected with it, that the police could not but realise that they had
stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more
32 The Call ofCthulhu
diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles. * Of its
origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the
captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence
the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help
them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the
cult to its fountain-head.
Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which
his offering created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw
the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and
they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive
figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity
hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognised
school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries
and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish
surface of unplaceable stone.
The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for
close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height,
and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of
vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face
was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws
on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing,
which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy,
was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters.
The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat
occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up,
crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of
the way down towards the bottom of the pedestal. The cephalopod
head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed
the backs of huge fore-paws which clasped the croucher's elevated
knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more
subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast,
awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did
it show with any known type of art belonging to civilisation's
youth-or indeed to any other time.
Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for
the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks
and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy.
The characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member
The Call ofCthulhu 33
present, despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in
this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic
kinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to something
horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it; something
frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which
our world and our conceptions have no part.
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed
defeat at the Inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous
shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the
odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb,
professor of anthropology in Princeton University, and an explorer
of no slight note.
Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a
tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions
which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland
coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Eskimos
whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its
deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which
other Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only with
shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient aeons
before ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and human
sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to
supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Professor Webb had
taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok* or wizard-priest,
expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just
now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high
over the ice cliffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief
of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And
as far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of
the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.
This data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he
began at once to ply his informant with questions. Having noted and
copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshippers his men had
arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the
syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Eskimos. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really
34 The Call ofCthulhu
awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual
identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds
of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and
the Louisiana swamp-priests had chanted to their kindred idols was
something very like this-the word-divisions being guessed at from
traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud:
Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'()leh wgah'naglfhtagn.
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several
among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this:
In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.
And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector
Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp
worshippers; telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached
profound significance. It savoured of the wildest dreams of mythmaker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic
imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as might be least
expected to possess it.
On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a
frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south.
The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants
of Lafitte's men,* were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown
thing which had stolen upon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever known;
and some of their women and children had disappeared since the
malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the
black haunted woods where no dweller ventured. There were insane
shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing
devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could
stand it no more.
So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile,
had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide.
At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed
on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never
came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss
beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragments of
The Call ofCthulhu 35
a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression
which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to
create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts,
hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the
group of bobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now
faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed
to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed
squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch towards the
scene of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none
of them had ever trod before.
The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil
repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There
were legends of a hidden lake un glimpsed by mortal sight, in which
dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes;
and squatters whispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. They said it had been
there before D'Iberville, before La Salle, * before the Indians, and
he fore even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was
nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and
so they knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was,
indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location
was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had
terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.
Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by
J _egrasse's men as they ploughed on through the black morass
towards the red glare and the muffled tom-toms. There are vocal
qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it
is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other.
Animal fury and orgiastic licence here whipped themselves to demoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the
~ulfs of hell. Now and then the less organised ululations would cease,
and from what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would
rise in singsong chant that hideous phrase or ritual:
Ph'nglui mglw'najh Cthulhu R'(yeh wgah'nagIJhtagn.
The Call ofCthulhu
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner,
came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled,
one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad
cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp
water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and
nearly hypnotised with horror.
In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an
acre's extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and
twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any
but a Sime or an Angarola* could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid
spawn were braying, bellowing and writhing about a monstrous ringshaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional rifts in
the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in
height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the
noxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at
regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre hung, head
downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who
had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers
jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being
from left to right in endless bacchanale between the ring of bodies
and the ring of fire.
It may have been only imagination and it may have been only
echoes which induced one ofthe men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he
heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror.
This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I latter met and questioned; and he
proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of
the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and
mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees-but I suppose
he had been hearing too much native superstition.
Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief
duration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly
a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their
firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five
minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wild
blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in
the end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners,
whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows
of policemen. Five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely
The Call ofCthulhu 37
wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their
fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was fully
removed and carried back by Legrasse.
Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded,
and mentally aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of
negroes and mulattos, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese
from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to
the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions were asked, it
became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro
fetishism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the
creatures held with surprising consistency to the central idea of their
loathsome faith.
They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages
before there were any men, and who came to the young world out
of the sky. These Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and
under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams
to the first man, who formed a cult which had never died. This was
that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always
would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the
world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark
house in the mighty city of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and
bring the earth again beneath his sway. Some day he would call, when
the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to
liberate him.
Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even
torture could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among
the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit
the faithful few. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had
ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none
might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. No one
could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of
mouth. The chanted ritual was not the secret-that was never
spoken aloud, only whispered. The chant meant only this: 'In his
house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.'
Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged,
and the rest were committed to various institutions. All denied a part
in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by
Black-winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial
The Call ofCthulhu
meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies
no coherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extract
came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo* named Castro, who
claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying
leaders of the cult in the mountains of China. *
Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the
speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent
and transient indeed. There had been aeons when other Things ruled
on the earth, and They had had great cities. Remains of Them, he
said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be found as
Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific.* They all died vast epochs
of time before man came, but there were arts which could revive
Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in
the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the
stars, and brought Their images with Them.
These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed
altogether of flesh and blood. They had shape-for did not this starfashioned image prove it?-but that shape was not made of matter.
When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world
through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live.
But although They no longer lived, They would never really die.
They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved
by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the
stars and the earth might once more be ready for Them. But at that
time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their bodies.
The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them
from making an initial move, and They could only lie awake in the
dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. They
knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of spee~h
was transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs.
When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old
Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for
only thus could Their language reach the fleshy minds of mammals.
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around
small idols which the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim
eras from dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came
right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His
tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. The time
would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the
The Call ofCthulhu 39
Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil,* with laws
and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and revelling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways
to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth
would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile
the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those
ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.
In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old
Ones in dreams, but then something had happened. The great stone
city R'lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk beneath the
waves;* and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through
which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse.
Ilut memory never died, and high priests said that the city would rise
again when the stars were right. Then came out of the earth the black
spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked
up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castro
dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount
of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The
size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the
cult, he said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless deserts
of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars,* dreams hidden and
untouched. It was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virlually unknown beyond its members. No book had ever really hinted
of it, though the deathless Chinamen said that there were double
meanings in the Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred
which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the muchdiscussed couplet:
That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons cvcn death may dic.*
Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had
i nq uired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro,
apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret.
The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either
cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorilics in the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of
Professor Webb.
The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale,
corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent
The Call ofCthulhu
correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention
occurs in the formal publication of the society. Caution is the first
care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at
the latter's death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and
unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.
That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not
wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young
man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of
the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had
come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans?
Professor Angell's instant start on an investigation of the utmost
thoroughness was eminently natural; though privately I suspected
young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and
of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the
mystery at my uncle's expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings
collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but
the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject
led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So,
after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the
theosophical anthropological notes with the cult narrative ofLegrasse,
I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the
rebuke I thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and
aged man.
Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas
Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth-century Bret~n
architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely
Colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the
finest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms,
and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his
genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, be heard
for some time as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in
clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and fantasies
which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith*
makes visible in verse and in painting.
Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly
The Call ofCthulhu 41
at my knock and asked me my business without rising. When I
told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had
excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never
explained the reason for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in
this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out.
In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity for
he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and
their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and
he showed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake
with the potency of its black suggestion. He could not recall having
seen the original of this thing except in his own dream bas-relief, but
the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands. It
was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he
really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's
relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove
to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the
weird impressions.
He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me
see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green
stone-whose geomet~y, he oddly said, was all wrong-and hear with
frightened expectancy the ceaseless half-mental calling from underg;round: 'Cthulhufhtagn', 'Cthulhufhtagn'.
These words had formed part of that dread ritThese words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of
dead Cthulhu's dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt
deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had
heard ofthe cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst
the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue
of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in
dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld;
so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent
one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly
ill-mannered, which I could never like; but I was willing enough now
to admit both his genius and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises.
The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times
I had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of
that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even quest ioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. Old Castro,
The Call ofCthulhu
unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard so
graphically at first hand, though it was really no more than a detailed
confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for
I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very
ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist
of note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism as I wish it
still were, and I discounted with a most inexplicable perversity the
coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by
Professor Angell.
One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know,
is that my uncle's death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill
street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign
mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forget
the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in
Louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret methods and
poison needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites
and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but
in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the
deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's data
have come to sinister ears? I think Professor Angell died because he
knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much. Whether
I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.
III. The Madnessfrom the Sea
If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of
the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray
piece of shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have
stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number'of
an Australian journal, Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It had
escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance
been avidly collecting material for my uncle's research.
I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell
called the 'Cthulhu Cult', and was visiting a learned friend of
Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a local museum* and a mineralogist of note. Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set
on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was
caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the
stones. It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend has
The Call ofCthulhu 43
wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a
half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that
which Legrasse had found in the swamp.
Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the
item in detail, and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length.
What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my
flagging quest; and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read
as follows:
MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA
Vigilant Arrives with Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow. One
Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Desperate Battle and
I )eaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of Strange Experience.
Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow.
The Morrison Co.'s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso,* arrived
this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled
and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. Z.,
which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34 21', W. Longitude 152
Ii, with one living and one dead man aboard.
The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2nd was driven
considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and
monster waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a halfdelirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more
than a week.
The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown ori-
~in, about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney
University, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the
cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.
This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story
of piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some
intelligence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma
of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th, with a complement of
eleven men.
The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course
hy the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S. Latitude
-l9 51', W. Longitude 128 34', encountered the Alert, manned by a
queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas* and half-castes. Being ordered
peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon the strange
crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the schooner
44 The Call ofCthulhu
with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of the yacht's
equipment.
The Emma's men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the
schooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed
to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage
crew on the yacht's deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number
being slightly superior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.
Three of the Emma's men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate
Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen
proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original
direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed.
The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island,
although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the
men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this
part of his story and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm.
Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to
manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd.
From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little,
and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died.
Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure.
Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there
as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It
was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and
night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in
great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March I st.
Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellent
reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man.
The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter, beginning
tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak
more freely than he has done hitherto.
This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but
what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries
of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew
to order back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol?
What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma's crew had
died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had
the vice-admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known
of the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvellous of all, what
The Call ofCthulhu 45
deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a
malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events
so carefully noted by my uncle?
March 1st-our February 28th according to the International
Date Line-the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the
Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously
summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had
begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young
sculptor had moulded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu.
March 23rd the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and
left six men dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men
assumed a heightened vividness and darkened with dread of a giant
monster's malign pursuit, whilst an architect had gone mad and a
sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm
of April 2nd-the date on which all dreams of the dank city ceased,
and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever?
What of all this-and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken,
star-born Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult and
their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors
beyond man's power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind
alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever
monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind's soul.
That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade
my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month
I was in Dunedin: where, however, I found that little was known of
the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea taverns.
Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though
there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made,
during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills.
In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair
turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at
Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed
with his wife to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he
would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials,
and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.
After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen
and members of the vice-admiralty court. I saw the Alert, now sold
and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained
The Call ofCthulhu
nothing from its noncommittal bulk. The cro